New to This Edition
Here we provide an overview of the new features that we have developed for the Third Canadian Edition; we invite you to explore pages xxvi–xxix for more information and examples. 
Visualizing Figures and Visual Skills Questions give students practice in interpreting and creating visual representations in biology. The Visualizing Figures have embedded questions that guide students in exploring how diagrams, photographs, and models represent and reflect biological systems and processes. Assignable questions are also available in Mastering Biology to give students practice with the visual skills addressed in the figures. 
Numeracy Questions and Problem-Solving Exercises challenge students to apply scientific skills and interpret data in solving real-world problems. These exercises are designed to engage students through compelling case studies and provide practice with data analysis skills. Problem-Solving Exercises have assignable versions in Mastering Biology. Some also have more extensive “Solve It” investigations to further explore a given topic. 
Ready-to-Go Teaching Modules on key topics provide instructors with assignments to use before and after class, as well as in-class activities that use clickers or Learning Catalytics™ for assessment. 
Integrated text and media: Media references in the printed book direct students to the wealth of online self-study resources available to them in the Study Area section of Mastering Biology. In the eText, these resources are integrated directly into the eText. The new online learning tools include:
Figure Walkthroughs that guide students through key figures with narrated explanations, figure markups, and questions that reinforce important points. Additional questions can be assigned in Mastering Biology. 
Animations and videos that bring biology to life. These include resources from HHMI BioInteractive that engage students in topics from the discovery of the double helix to evolution. 
Interviews from the First Edition through the Third Canadian Edition of Campbell BIOLOGY that are referenced in the chapter where they are most relevant. The interviews show students the human side of science by featuring diverse scientists talking about how they became interested in what they study, how they began, and what inspires them. 
The impact of climate change at all levels of the biological hierarchy is explored throughout the text, starting with a new figure (Figure 1.12) and discussion in Chapter 1 and concluding with a new Unit 8 Make Connections Figure and expanded coverage on causes and effects of climate change in Chapter 56. 
As in each new edition of Campbell BIOLOGY, the Third Canadian Edition incorporates new content and pedagogical improvements. These are summarized on pp. vi–viii, following this Preface. Content updates reflect rapid, ongoing changes in technology and knowledge in the fields of genomics, gene editing technology (CRISPR), evolutionary biology, microbiology, and more. In addition, significant revisions to Unit 8, Ecology, improve the conceptual framework for core ecological topics (such as population growth, species interactions, and community dynamics) and more deeply integrate evolutionary principles. 
