Our Hallmark Features
Teachers of general biology face a daunting challenge: to help students acquire a conceptual framework for organizing an ever-expanding amount of information. The hallmark features of Campbell BIOLOGY provide such a framework while promoting a deeper understanding of biology and the process of science. Chief among the themes of Campbell BIOLOGY is evolution. Chapters throughout the text include at least one Evolution section that explicitly focuses on evolutionary aspects of the chapter material, and chapters end with an Evolution Connection Question and a Write about a Theme Question. 
To help students distinguish the “forest from the trees,” each chapter is organized around a framework of three to seven carefully chosen Key Concepts. The text, Concept Check Questions, Summary of Key Concepts, and Mastering Biology all reinforce these main ideas and essential facts. 
In an effort to act on the Calls to Action from the Truth and Reconciliation Commissioners’ Report (2012) , the Canadian authors were committed to including more Indigenous content in this text. Pearson’s fist step in this third Canadian edition is to acknowledge and highlight terminologies that come from Indigenous origins and include references to how Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK) is being used in Chapter 21 and 54. The authors recognize this is just the beginning in a long process of responding to Truth and Reconciliation with Indigenous Peoples of this land. 
Because text and illustrations are equally important for learning biology, integration of text and figures has been a hallmark of this text since the first edition. In addition to the new Visualizing Figures, our popular Exploring Figures and Make Connections Figures epitomize this approach. Each Exploring Figure is a learning unit of core content that brings together related illustrations and text. Make Connections Figures reinforce fundamental conceptual connections throughout biology, helping students overcome tendencies to compartmentalize information. The Third Canadian Edition features two new Make Connections Figures. There are also Guided Tour Figures that walk students through complex figures as an instructor would. 
To encourage active reading of the text, Campbell BIOLOGY includes numerous opportunities for students to stop and think about what they are reading, often by putting pencil to paper to draw a sketch, annotate a figure, or graph data. Active reading questions include Make Connections Questions, What If? Questions, Figure Legend Questions, Draw It Questions, Summary Questions, and the new Synthesize Your Knowledge and Interpret the Data Questions. The answers to most of these questions require students to write as well as think and thus help develop the core competency of communicating science. 
Finally, Campbell BIOLOGY has always featured scientific inquiry, an essential component of any biology course. Complementing stories of scientific discovery in the text narrative, the unit-opening interviews, and our standard-setting Inquiry Figures all deepen the ability of students to understand how we know what we know. Scientific Inquiry Questions give students opportunities to practise scientific thinking, along with the Problem-Solving Exercises, Scientific Skills Exercises, and Interpret the Data Questions. Together, these activities provide students practice both in applying the process of science and in using quantitative reasoning. 
