New and Featured Content
This section highlights selected new and featured content and organizational changes in Campbell BIOLOGY, Third Canadian Edition. 
Chapter 1 Evolution, the Themes of Biology, and Scientific Inquiry
To help students focus on the big ideas of biology, we continue to emphasize five themes: Organization, Information, Energy and Matter, Interactions, and the core theme of Evolution. Chapter 1 opens with a new introduction to a case study about the Canadian Yew tree. 
Unit 1 The Chemistry of Life
In Unit 1, new content engages students in learning this foundational material. The new Figure 3.7 show organisms affected by loss of Arctic sea ice. Chapter 5 has updates on lactose intolerance, trans fats, the effects of diet on blood cholesterol, protein sequences and structures, and intrinsically disordered proteins. New Visualizing Figure 5.16 helps students understand various ways proteins are depicted. A new Problem-Solving Exercise engages students by having them compare DNA sequences in a case of possible fish fraud. Unit 1 also highlights research by the Department of Fisheries and Oceans, discussion of Frances Oldham Kelsey and thalidomide, as well as work by Edward Fon and Kalle Gehring from McGill University on the structure of the parkin protein. A new interview featuring Roberta Hamme, from the University of Victoria, is also included. 
1-12 Full Alternative Text
Unit 2 The Cell
Our main goal for this unit was to make the material more accessible and inviting to students. New Visualizing Figure 6.32 shows the profusion of molecules and structures in a cell, all drawn to scale. In Chapter 7, a new figure illustrates levels of LDL receptors in people with and without familial hypercholesterolemia. Chapter 8 includes a beautiful new photo of a geyser with thermophilic bacteria in Figure 8.17, bringing to life the graphs of optimal temperatures for enzyme function. Chapter 10 discusses current research trying to genetically modify rice (a C3 crop) so that it is capable of carrying out C4 photosynthesis to increase yields. Chapter 11 includes a new Problem-Solving Exercise that guides students through assessing possible new treatments for bacterial infections by blocking quorum sensing. In Chapter 12, the mechanism of chromosome movement in bacteria has been updated and more cell cycle control checkpoints have been added, including one recently proposed by researchers. Unit 2 also features the identification of LHON mutations by Eric Shoubridge at McGill University; the International Cancer Genome Consortium, co-founded by Thomas Hudson, Scientific Director of the Ontario Institute of Cancer Research; and work on membrane proteins by Frances Sharom at the University of Guelph. A new interview featuring Jason Treberg, from the University of Manitoba, is also included. 
Unit 3 Genetics
In Chapters 13–17, we have incorporated changes that help students grasp the more abstract concepts of genetics and their chromosomal and molecular underpinnings. For example, a new Visual Skills Question with Figure 13.6 asks students to identify where in the three life cycles haploid cells undergo mitosis, and what type of cells are formed. Chapter 14 includes new information from a recent genomic study on the number of genes and genetic variants contributing to height. Chapters 14 and 15 are more inclusive, clarifying the meaning of the term “normal” in genetics and explaining that sex is no longer thought to be simply binary. Other updates in Chapter 15 include new research in sex determination and a technique being developed to avoid passing on mitochondrial diseases. New Visualizing Figure 16.7 shows students various ways that DNA is illustrated. To help students understand the Beadle and Tatum experiment, new Figure 17.2 explains how they obtained nutritional mutants. A new Problem-Solving Exercise asks students to identify mutations in the insulin gene and predict their effect on the protein. Chapters 18–21 are extensively updated, driven by exciting new discoveries based on DNA sequencing and gene-editing technology. Chapter 18 has updates on histone modifications, nuclear location and the persistence of transcription factories, chromatin remodelling by ncRNAs, long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), the role of master regulatory genes in modifying chromatin structure, and the possible role of p53 in the low incidence of cancer in elephants. Make Connections Figure 18.27, “Genomics, Cell Signalling, and Cancer,” has been expanded to include more information on cell signaling. Chapter 19 expands the section that covers bacterial defences against bacteriophages and describes the CRISPRCas9 system (Figure 19.8); updates include the Ebola, Chikungunya, and Zika viruses (Figure 19.12) and discovery of the largest virus known to date. A discussion has been added of mosquito transmission of diseases and concerns about the effects of global climate change on disease transmission. In Chapter 21, in addition to the usual updates of sequence-related data (speed of sequencing, number of species’ genomes sequenced, etc.), there are several research updates, including some early results from the new Roadmap Epigenomics Project and results from a 2015 study focusing on 414 important yeast genes. 
Unit 3 also features the work of Stephen Scherer, who produced a detailed annotated map and DNA sequence of human chromosome 7; Calvin Harley and the discovery of telomeres; Michael Houghton, whose research team recently developed a vaccine for the hepatitis C virus at the University of Alberta; the Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre in Vancouver, which generated the first genome sequence of SARS; Frank Plummer at the National Microbiology Laboratory in Winnipeg, whose team sequenced the full genome of H1N1 flu samples; James Till and Ernest McCulloch, the Canadian scientists who discovered stem cells; and Michael Rudnicki, who led the team that discovered adult muscle stem cells at the Sprott Centre for Stem Cell Research in Ottawa. In addition, a range of genomics research in Canada is featured in the updated Exploring Figure 21.6. A new interview featuring Julie Claycomb, from the University of Toronto, is also included. 
Unit 4 Mechanisms of Evolution
A major goal for this revision was to strengthen how we help students understand and interpret visual representations of evolutionary data and concepts. Toward this end, we have added a new figure (Figure 25.8), “Visualizing the Scale of Geologic Time,” and a new figure (Figure 23.11) on gene flow. Several figures have been revised to improve the presentation of data, including Figure 24.6 (on reproductive isolation in mosquitofish), Figure 24.10 (on allopolyploid speciation), and Figure 25.26 (on the origin of the insect body plan). A new Problem-Solving Exercise is included in Chapter 24 on how hybridization may have led to the spread of insecticide resistance genes in mosquitoes that transmit malaria. The unit also includes new chapter opening stories in Chapter 22 (expanding on the evolution of the bombardier beetle defence mechanism) and Chapter 23 (on the Vancouver Island marmot and population change over time). Additional changes include new text in Concept 22.3 emphasizing how populations can evolve over short periods of time, a new table (Table 23.1) highlighting the five conditions required for a population to be in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, and new material in Concept 25.1 describing how researchers recently succeeded for the first time in constructing a “protocell” in which replication of a template strand of RNA could occur. Unit 4 includes updated data on MRSA incidence at Canadian hospitals, and profiles the research of Darla Zelenitsky at the University of Calgary on the discovery of a winged dinosaur with feathers in the Badlands of Alberta, the research of Hans Larsson from McGill University on phenotype plasticity in tetrapods, and the research of Charles Henderson and others who pinpointed the end-Permian mass extinction. A new interview featuring Maydianne Andrade, from the University of Toronto Scarborough, is also included. 
1-13 Full Alternative Text
Unit 5 The Evolutionary History of Biological Diversity
In keeping with our goal of improving how students interpret and create visual representations in biology, we have added a new figure (Figure 26.6, “Visualizing Phylogenetic Relationships”) that introduces the visual conventions used in phylogenetic trees and helps students understand what such trees do and don’t convey. Students are also provided many opportunities to practise their visual skills, with more than ten new Visual Skills Questions on topics ranging from interpreting phylogenetic trees to predicting which regions of a bacterial flagellum are hydrophobic. The unit also contains new content on tree thinking, emphasizing such key points as how sister groups provide a clear way to describe evolutionary relationships and how trees do not show a “direction” in evolution. Other major content changes include new text in Concepts 26.6, 27.4, and 28.1 on the 2015 discovery of the Lokiarchaeota, a group of archaea that may represent the sister group of the eukaryotes, new text and a new figure (Figure 26.22) on horizontal gene transfer from prokaryotes to eukaryotes, new text in Concept 27.6 describing the CRISPR-Cas9 system and a new figure (Figure 27.22) that illustrates one example of how CRISPR-Cas 9 technology has opened new avenues of research on HIV, and new material in Concept 29.3 describing how early forests contributed to global climate change (in this case, global cooling). A new Problem-Solving Exercise in Chapter 34 engages students in interpreting data from a study investigating whether frogs can acquire resistance to a fungal pathogen through controlled exposure to it. Other updates include the revision of many phylogenies to reflect recent phylogenomic data, new chapter-opening stories in Chapter 28 (on the role of heterotrophy in establishing endosymbioses), Chapter 31 (on how mycorrhizae link trees of different species on the importance of yeast in creating ethanol, an important biofuel.) and Chapter 33 (on the visual perception by the eyes of the blue-eyed scallop). There is also new text and a new figure (Figure 34.38) on the adaptations of the kangaroo rat to its arid environment, and new material in Concept 34.7, including a new figure (Figure 34.52) describing fossil and DNA evidence indicating that humans and Neanderthals interbred, producing viable offspring. The discussion of human evolution also includes new text and a new figure (Figure 34.54) on Homo naledi, the most recently discovered member of the human evolutionary lineage. This unit also highlights research on mycorrhizal networks by Suzanne Simard at the University of British Columbia; research on early eukaryotic evolution by Patrick Keeling at the University of British Columbia; data from COSEWIC (Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada), a profile of the Banff spring snail, and endangered species; the Hydrocarbon Metagenome projects run out of the University of Calgary and the University of Alberta, and the Wildlife DNA Forensic Laboratory at Trent University. A new interview featuring Laura Hug, from the University of Waterloo, is also included. 
Unit 6 Plant Form and Function
A major aim in revising Chapter 35 was to help students better understand how primary and secondary growth are related. New Visualizing Figure 35.11 enables students to picture growth at the cellular level. Also, the terms protoderm, procambium, and ground meristem have been introduced to underscore the transition of meristematic to mature tissues. A new flowchart (Figure 35.24) summarizes growth in a woody shoot. New text and a figure (Figure 35.26) focus on genome analysis of Arabidopsis ecotypes, relating plant morphology to ecology and evolution. In Chapter 36, new Figure 36.8 illustrates the fine branching of leaf veins, and information on phloem-xylem water transfer has been updated. New Make Connections Figure 37.10 highlights mutualism across kingdoms and domains. Figure 37.13 and the related text include new findings on how some soil nitrogen derives from weathering of rocks. New Figure 38.3 clarifies how the terms carpel and pistil are related. The text on flower structure and the angiosperm life cycle figure identify carpels as megasporophylls and stamens as microsporophylls, correlating with the plant evolution discussion in Unit 5. In Concept 38.3, the current problem of glyphosate-resistant crops is discussed in detail. A revised Figure 39.7 helps students visualize how cells elongate. Figure 39.8 now addresses apical dominance in a Guided Tour format. Information about the role of sugars in controlling apical dominance has been added. In Concepts 39.4, a new Problem-Solving Exercise highlights how global climate change affects crop productivity. Figure 39.26 on defence responses against pathogens has been simplified and improved. 
Amongst others, we highlight the work of Rob Guy at the University of British Columbia on balsam poplar trees; Doug Larson at the University of Guelph on cedars growing out of the rock face of the Niagara Escarpment; R. Keith Downey at the Ministry of Agriculture in Saskatoon and Baldur Stefansson at the University of Manitoba in Winnipeg on canola oil, and Mark Belmonte at the University of Manitoba on disease resistance in plants. An Inquiry Figure features the work of Bruce Greenberg and Bernie Glick at the University of Waterloo on the possible effects of soil bacteria. A new interview featuring Jacqueline Monaghan, from Queen’s University, is also included. 
Unit 7 Animal Form and Function
A major goal of the Unit 7 revision was to transform how students interact with and learn from representations of anatomy and physiology. For example, gastrulation is now introduced with a Visualizing Figure (Figure 47.8) that provides a clear and carefully paced introduction to three-dimensional processes that may be difficult for students to grasp. In addition, a number of the new and revised figures help students explore spatial relationships in anatomical contexts, such as the interplay of lymphatic and cardiovascular circulation (Figure 42.15) and the relationship of the limbic system to overall brain structure (Figure 49.14). A new Problem-Solving Exercise in Chapter 45 taps into student interest in medical mysteries through a case study that explores the science behind laboratory testing and diagnosis. Content updates help students appreciate the continued evolution of our understanding of even familiar phenomena, such as the evolution of hemoglobin in high altitude animals (Concept 42.7), the sensation of thirst (Concept 44.4) and the locomotion of kangaroos and jellies (Concept 50.6). Furthermore, new text and figures introduce students to cutting-edge technology relating to such topics as RNA-based antiviral defence in invertebrates (Figure 43.4) and rapid, comprehensive characterization of viral exposure (Figure 43.24), as well as recent discoveries regarding brown fat in adult humans (Figure 40.14), the microbiome (Figure 41.18), parthenogenesis (Concept 46.1), and magnetoreception (Concept 50.1). As always, there is fine-tuning of pedagogy, as in discussions of the complementary roles of inactivation and voltage gating of ion channels during action potential formation (Concept 48.3) and of the experimental characterization of genetic determinants in bird migration (Figure 51.24). Additional research highlighted in this unit includes Janet Rossant at the University of Toronto on cell fate determination; Naweed Syed at the University of Calgary on synaptic repair; University of British Columbia researchers exploring the impact of global warming trends on salmon; University of Manitoba explores the evolution of the thermogenin gene in mammals; Karen Kidd at the University of New Brunswick on environmental estrogens; Barrie Frost of Queen’s University, who explored the navigational mechanisms used by monarch butterflies; and Suzie Currie of Mount Allison University on phenotypic plasticity and environmental stress. A new interview featuring Matt Vijayan, from the University of Calgary, is also included. 
1-15 Full Alternative Text
Unit 8 Ecology
The Ecology Unit has been extensively revised for the Third Canadian Edition. We have reorganized and improved the conceptual framework with which students are introduced to the following core ecological topics: life tables, per capita population growth, intrinsic rate of increase (“r”), exponential population growth, logistic population growth, density dependence, species interactions (in particular, parasitism, commensalism, and mutualism), and MacArthur and Wilson’s island biogeography model. The revision also includes a deeper integration of evolutionary principles, including a new Key Concept (52.5) and two new figures (Figures 52.20 and 52.21) on the reciprocal effects of ecology and evolution, new material in Concept 52.4 on how the geographic distributions of species are shaped by a combination of evolutionary history and ecological factors, and five new Make Connections Questions that ask students to examine how ecological and evolutionary mechanisms interact. In keeping with our goal of expanding and strengthening our coverage of climate change, we have added a new discussion and a new figure (Figure 52.20) on how climate change has affected the distribution of a keystone species, a new section of text in Concept 55.2 on how climate change affects NPP, a new figure (Figure 55.9) on how climate change has caused an increase in wildfires and insect outbreaks, a new Problem-Solving Exercise in Chapter 55 that explores how insect outbreaks induced by climate change can cause an ecosystem to switch from a carbon sink to a carbon source, a new figure (Figure 56.29) on the greenhouse effect, new text in Concept 56.4 on biological effects of climate change, and a new Unit 8 Make Connections Figure on how climate change affects all levels of biological organization. Additional updates include a new figure (Figure 53.26) on per capita ecological footprints, a new chapter-opening story in Chapter 54 on a seemingly unlikely mutualism between a shrimp and a much larger predatory fish, new text in Concept 54.1 emphasizing that each partner in a mutualism experiences both benefits and costs, new text in Concept 54.1 describing how the outcome of an ecological interaction can change over time, two new figures (Figures 54.29 and 54.30) on the island equilibrium model, a new figure (Figure 54.31) documenting two shrew species as unexpected hosts of the Lyme disease, new text in Concept 56.1 comparing extinction rates today with those typically seen in the fossil record, and a new discussion and figure (Figure 56.20) on the restoration of a degraded urban stream. Unit 8 also profiles the research of David Schindler from the University of Alberta, and Verena Tunnicliffe from the University of Victoria. A new interview featuring Erin Bertrand, from Dalhousie University, is also included. The book ends on a hopeful note, charging students to use biological knowledge to help solve problems and improve life on Earth. 
1-16 Full Alternative Text
