See the Big Picture
Key Concepts
Each chapter is organized around a framework of 3 to 7 Key Concepts that focus on the big picture and provide a context for the supporting details. 
1-17 Full Alternative Text
Every chapter opens with a visually dynamic photo accompanied by an intriguing question that invites students into the chapter. 
The List of Key Concepts introduces the big ideas covered in the chapter. 
After reading a Key Concept section, students can check their understanding using the Concept Check Questions. 
1-18 Full Alternative Text
Questions throughout the chapter encourage students to read the text actively. 
What if? Questions ask students to apply what they’ve learned. 
Make Connections Questions ask students to relate content in the chapter to material presented earlier in the course. 
The Summary of Key Concepts refocuses students on the main points of the chapter. 
1-20 Full Alternative Text
Summary Figures recap key information in a visual way. 
Summary of Key Concepts Questions check students’ understanding of a key idea from each concept. 
Test Your Understanding Questions at the end of each chapter are organized into three levels based on Bloom’s Taxonomy:
Level 1: Knowledge/Comprehension
Level 2: Application/Analysis
Level 3: Synthesis/Evaluation
Test Bank questions and multiple-choice questions in Mastering Biology® are also categorized by Bloom’s Taxonomy. 
To reinforce the themes, every chapter ends with an Evolution Connection Question and a Write About a Theme Question. 
Synthesize Your Knowledge Questions ask students to apply their understanding of the chapter content to explain an intriguing photo. 
Themes
To help students focus on the big ideas of biology, five themes are introduced in Chapter 1 and woven throughout the text:
Evolution
Organization
Information
Energy and Matter
Interactions
Every chapter has a section explicitly relating the chapter content to evolution, the fundamental theme of biology. 
1-22 Full Alternative Text
